- [Instructor] Let's walk through a few examples
to see the methods on the queue in action.
To do this, we're going to revisit
the check-in list scenario
that we used when working with a list.
You'll see that this problem
is much better suited for a solution that uses a queue.
So to start out,
I'm going to create a queue that holds guests
and I'll name it the checkinQueue.
For the queue implementation,
I'm going to use an array deque.
Okay, so now we have our queue.
The first thing that I'm going to do on this queue
might seem a little bit odd,
but I'm going to attempt to retrieve
the element at the head of our empty queue
using the remove method.
And then from there,
I'm just going to print that element
or guest to the console.
Now watch the behavior here.
You'll notice that the method throws an exception
because I'm trying to remove the element
at the head of an empty queue.
Now if I were to switch over this method
from remove to poll,
we'll get different behavior
and you'll notice that it returns null.
So that's the difference between some of those behaviors
we discussed for the method pairs that insert, remove,
and examine elements in the queue.
Some throw exceptions while others return a special value
like a null or a Boolean.
Now let's add some guests into the queue
so we can work with it.
Now you'll notice we could use the add method
and this is one of the methods that will throw an exception
if we attempt to add too many elements to a bounded queue.
And we can see that within the Java docs.
it's always a good idea to take a peek
at the behavior of the method within the IDE
so you get the exact one you'd like.
Now I don't want to throw an exception,
so instead I'm going to use offer
in order to add John into the queue.
Okay, so now we have John in the queue.
Let's go ahead and we'll add Bob as well.
With both guests in the queue,
I'm then going to use a small utility method
that I've added to the class
that prints out the queue's contents
and gives us some information about what guest
is in each position in the queue.
So let's go ahead.
We'll invoke that right after adding
our guests into the queue.
Then I'm going to go ahead
and call that method again
after we pull the queue and remove John.
Okay, so let's go ahead
and we'll execute this code,
and you'll notice that both guests
were added into the queue.
First, John was added at the head of the queue
and then Bob was inserted after him.
Now when we polled the queue
and removed the element at the head, it removed John
and then you'll notice that Bob
advanced to the head of the queue.
So that's the behavior of first-in, first-out order.
We inserted John first
and he was the first to removed.
Okay, let's now add two other guests into our queue.
First, I'm going to add Sonia followed by Siri.
Then I'm going to copy this block of code
and modify it to use the peek method.
So I'll switch over to guest1
and then instead of polling
I'm just going to peek,
and then we'll print out guest1.
Now let's see what happens here.
So you'll notice that the four guests
were added into the queue
and then we polled one element from the queue
and that got us John who was at the head.
But then when we peeked
we got the element at the head of the queue,
but that element remained in the queue.
And that's the difference between poll and peek.
Poll is going to retrieve
and remove the element at the head of the queue
while peek is just going
to retrieve it for us without removing it.
Now throughout this example,
I've been using all of the queue methods
that do not throw exceptions.
We could easily switch over to them.
So I'm just going to replace offer with add in my code
and then I can close that dialogue,
and then we'll switch over from poll to remove
and then the equivalent method for peek is element.
So these methods would all throw exceptions
if we were dealing with a full or an empty queue.
Now that's not the case,
so we don't see that when we execute them.
But aside from the exceptions and the return types,
the behaviors are all the same as their counterparts.
Now I want to show you one other queue implementation.
You'll recall that I mentioned
not all queues are first-in, first-out order.
That's the case when we use
the priority queue implementation.
This implementation allows us to provide
a comparitor that determines the order
that elements are stored in the queue.
So I'm going to switch over to the priority queue
and then we need to build a comparitor for it.
So to do that, I'll declare a comparitor
and it will have a generic type of guest,
and the competitor's going to help us
with our loyalty program.
So I'm just going to call it programComp.
And then in order to create the comparitor,
I can use the static comparing method
that is found on the comparitor type.
From here I can pass in a method reference
to the isLoyaltyProgramMember method
and then I'm going to reverse the comparitor
so that it sorts our guests in descending order.
This is going to place loyalty program members
ahead of non-loyalty program members.
Okay, now once we have the comparitor,
we just need to pass it into the constructor
of the priority queue.
Now watch what happens when I execute the code.
You'll notice that our two members
of the loyalty program, Sonia and Siri,
advance in front of John and Bob in the queue.
That's because John and Bob were not part of the program.
Using a priority queue and a comparitor
is a much simpler approach for achieving the logic
that we need to handle loyalty program members
within our check-in list.
I would definitely favor the priority queue
over the list solution that we built.
So that wraps up our look at the queue interface
and a few of its implementations.
The key to working with the queue
is understanding FIFO order
and the subtle differences in the behavior of its methods.